# The inner workings of L&L


<h2> Understanding dynamic tags </h2>

<p>
  The most basic superpower that L&amp;L gives you is the ability to 
  dynamically display content from your database—the massive spreadsheet-like 
  tables that store all the data from your WordPress site. This is done using 
  dynamic tags. Similar to HTML tags like 
  <code> &lt;strong&gt; </code> and 
  <code>&lt;ul&gt;</code> which give instructions to your browser about how to 
  display content, dynamic tags in L&amp;L extend the basic capabilities of 
  HTML, often by giving instructions to the server about what content it should 
  fetch, manipulate, or display. Any time you see a tag in L&amp;L that’s 
  capitalized, like <code>&lt;If&gt;</code> or <code>&lt;Get&gt;</code>, 
  that’s a dynamic tag.
</p>

<h3>An introduction to the <code>Loop</code> tag</h3>

<p>
  The most used dynamic tag in L&amp;L is <code>&lt;Loop&gt;</code>. It’s so important that we named the whole plugin after it! Think of a loop as an instruction that tells WordPress to look through (or <em>loop</em> through) the items in your site’s database to find every piece of content that matches a certain set of criteria. The inner content of the <code>Loop</code> tag (that is, everything written between the opening <code>&lt;Loop&gt;</code> tag and the closing <code>&lt;/Loop&gt;</code> tag) runs once for each item in the loop.&nbsp;A loop can be created from any content type on a WordPress site, such as posts, pages, custom post types, attachments, taxonomies, users, etc. This allows you to create a query for any post type (e.g. blog posts) that matches a set of criteria (e.g. posts in a certain taxonomy written in the last two months) and loop through each post to get or display its fields (e.g. the title, author, or URL).
</p>

<h2>Understanding the inner workings of Loops &amp; Logic</h2>

<p>
  Before we take a look at an example of L&amp;L markup in action, let’s start
  by getting a conceptual understanding of the way in which L&amp;L works and 
  how it differs from plain HTML. Some of these concepts might be familiar to
  you if you’re experienced with WordPress or frontend development.
</p>

<h3>L&amp;L markup gets rendered as HTML</h3>

<p>
  As you probably know, HTML is a markup language that can be understood by web
  browsers. But HTML on its own is static, meaning that it can only display 
  content that’s directly written in HTML on the page. If you had a blog that 
  was completely created using static HTML, each time you added a new blog
  post, you’d also need to edit the page that lists all your blog posts
  (an <em>archive</em> page in WordPress-speak) to add a link to your new post.
</p>

<p>
  This would be tedious to manage, which is why WordPress sites are dynamic; 
  they’re able to generate HTML documents based on a set of instructions written 
  in PHP. When you click to view our blog archive on this site, our servers 
  don’t necessarily send you a pre-made HTML document. Instead, our servers 
  receive instructions in PHP about how to piece together—or render—an HTML 
  document that lists all the latest blog posts. That HTML document then gets 
  delivered to you and displayed in your browser.
</p>

<p>
  It’s important to keep in mind that while L&amp;L markup <em>looks</em> 
  similar to HTML, it <em>works</em> more similarly to dynamic languages in that
  it needs to be rendered before it can be displayed to your site’s visitors. 
  There are two implications of this:
</p>

<ol>
  <li>
    <strong>L&amp;L code needs to be processed just like any other dynamic 
    language</strong>. This means that it’s important to keep your code lean and
    efficient to minimize its effect on page load times. We include tools (like 
    the <code>&lt;Timer&gt;</code> tag) to help you write efficient code.
  </li>
  <li>
    <strong>L&amp;L needs to be written inside of a template</strong>. Neither 
    WordPress nor browsers natively understand how to display the dynamic tags 
    in L&amp;L markup, so it needs to be processed first inside of an L&amp;L 
    template. 
  </li>
</ol>

<h3>A loop is a process, not a shortcut</h3>

<p>
  As we noted above, the <code>&lt;Loop&gt;</code> tag is like an instruction 
  that tells WordPress to look through the items in your site’s database to find
  every piece of content that matches a certain set of criteria. It’s important 
  to keep in mind that in general, when you open a loop, you’re not just making 
  data appear on the page. Instead, you’re actually telling your server to dig 
  through all the content contained within a subset of your site’s database each
  time that page is loaded by a visitor on your site. Repeating loops throughout
  a page or creating complex nested loops can dramatically increase a page’s 
  load time, so it’s important to consider your page’s performance by 
  recognizing that the <code>&lt;Loop&gt;</code> tag is an instruction to 
  process your site’s data, not a shortcut to the data itself.
</p>

<p>
  What does this mean in practice? Let’s imagine you’re creating a user 
  dashboard and you want to personalize it a bit by referring to your user 
  throughout the page. You could use either of the following bits of markup to
  display the user’s name. Don’t worry if you don’t understand what this markup 
  is actually <em>doing</em> yet, we’ll get to that later.
</p>

```html
  <Loop type=user id=current>
    Hey there, <Field full_name />!
  </Loop>
```

```html
  Hey there, <User full_name/>!
```


<p>
  Since L&amp;L makes it so simple to display dynamic data on your page 
  (particularly with the simple <code>&lt;User&gt;</code> tag in this case), it 
  could be tempting to sprinkle that markup anywhere on your dashboard where you
  want to refer to your user by name. But doing this would result in a new 
  server process running in every spot where the user’s name is mentioned, which
  could impact the page’s load time. Instead of creating a new loop every time 
  you want to display the user’s name, a better approach would be to use a 
  single loop to save the user’s name to a variable and then refer to that saved
  variable throughout the page. Even if you don't yet know how to do that, the 
  important takeaway here is to remember that the way you choose to write your 
  templates has an impact on server load (and therefore page load time) so 
  you'll want to use the tools built into L&amp;L to help you write smart, 
  efficient markup.
</p>

